Which of the following is an example for a plant which does not produce seeds?
The SI unit of force in fundamental units is,
Which of the following is a homogeneous mixture?
Of the following statements, which is false about a silicon npn junction transistor?
If an object is to stay in equilibrium under three forces,
In the urine filtration process taking place in kidneys, which of the following is filtered into the glomerulus from blood?
The typical cell is
Which of the following equipments is based on the phenomenon of electromagnetic induction?
Consider the following statements about catalysts.       A - Catalysts increase as well as decrease reaction rates.       B - Though catalysts take part in the chemical reaction, they are not consumed during the reaction.       C- A small amount of the catalyst is adequate for a large amount of reactants.       Of the above, the true statements are,
Consider the following equation.       2C6H12C6 ↔ C12H22O11 + H2O           (
When a block of wood A is placed in a liquid, it floats with a part immersed. Which of the following is the true statement in relation to this?
Which of the following oxides does not take part in the extraction process of iron?
An alternating voltage was subjected to full wave rectification followed by smoothing by a capacitor. Which of the following graphs illustrates the variation of the output voltage (V) with time (t)?
What is the phenotype ratio obtained, when two organisms with the genotypes Tt and tt were crossed?
Consider the following aqueous solutions of equal concentration. (a) NaOH (b) NH,OH (c) CH2COOH (d) HCI Select the option which indicates the increasing order of their pH correctly.
What is the option that correctly indicates all the species contained in an aqueous solution of hydrochloric acid?
The total number of atoms in one mole of CO molecules is
Hydrogen sulphide (H,S), reacts with sulphur dioxide (SO2) according to the following balanced chemical equation. 2H,S + SO, → 2H,0+ 3S The amount of moles of sulphur dioxide that reacts with one mole of hydrogen sulphide is
Given here is a diagram of a plant cell. What are the parts indicated in it that are seen in animal cells as well?
Consider the following statements about the compounds, carbon dioxide and sulphur dioxide. A - They are acidic oxides. B - They exist as gases under room temperature. C - They are colourless. Of the above, the true statements are,
In the following figure, a, b and c are three beams of light. Using a glass lens, one of these beams can be converted into another type of beam that is shown in the diagram. Which of the following statements correctly indicates this conversion? C-cytoplasm
Consider an instance where a convex lens is used to read a label with very small letters. Here, the label should be placed,
Some features observed when an animal was examined are as follows: • Has four pentadactyl limbs • Has a glandular skin • Has a broad mouth • Cold-blooded This animal could be the
A tightly stoppered, half-filled bottle of soda water was taken out from a refrigerator and kept outside until it reaches the room temperature. When kept like this, the mole fraction of carbon dioxide,
In respiration of living organisms, oxygen gas and carbon dioxide gas exchange at the respiratory surface. Accordingly, the respiratory surface of the human is
A small glass ball and a big iron ball were dropped on to a porcelain surface from the same height. The porcelain surface cracked at the point at which the iron ball hit it. No such crack was caused by the glass ball. Of the following, greatness of which quantity of the iron ball than that of the glass ball could be the reason for this?
As shown in the figure, water is filled to the same height from level X in three tanks, A, B and C which are different in breadth. Which of the following is correct about the pressures P P, and Pc of the three tanks at level X?
The number of electrons and the number of neutrons in the ion indicated by the symbol 23 Nat respectively
What characteristic given below should be studied to distinguish as living and non living the specimens; a fertilized egg, a piece of meat, a bean seed obtained before germination and a dry piece of a branch of a plant?
Which diagram correctly indicates the connection of 1 12,5 1 and 12 12 resistors so that the equivalent resistance between A and B is 4.12 ?
The diagram illustrates a cross section across the bund close to the sluice of a wewa (tank). What is the structure constructed to reduce the speed of water flow by reducing pressure, when water is released from the tank?
Some activities carried out after felling trees in a forest are given below. Among them, which one contributes most to increase the carbon dioxide percentage in the atmosphere in a short period of time?
It has been planned to hold a conference in Sri Lanka in May/June 2019, on a convention/treaty dealing with regulations related to the trade of endangered plants and animals. By what name is that convention/ treaty known?
Reduce, Reuse and Recycle are three, out of the principles used in waste/energy management. Which of the following is not a suitable example for "Reduce" given here?
Which of the following plants is a gymnosperm?
What is the unit of the moment of force?
The organ which mainly contributes to nitrogenous excretion in the human is
Which of the following substances can be mixed with water to make a heterogeneous mixture?
Which of the following organelles releases energy by aerobic respiration?
Which of the following oxides is basic?
The animal tissue given in the diagram is
Which of the following energy transformations takes place in a bicycle dynamo?
The biochemical reactions that take place in organisms are catalysed by
In which of the following instances, does a couple of forces act?
The number of electrons and the number of protons in an Alt ion are respectively, (The atomic number of Al is 13.)
What is the standard notation of Tritium?
Which of the following adaptations is shown by the seeds of Hora/Ennei plant for dispersal by wind?
A certain covalent compound is completely ionized in water. Which of the following could be this compound?
The endocrine glands that secrete glucagon and calcitonin in human body are respectively,
On a horizontal ground, the point B is located to the east of A and point C is located to the north of B. An ant has moved from A to C through the straight line paths AB and BC. If AB = 3 m and BC = 4m. what is the displacement of ant in this motion?
A situation where an image of a flower pot taken on to a white vertical plane using an item called X is shown in the figure. Which of the following could be X ?
Which of the following statements is true regarding waves?
The salts which precipitate in the first tank and third tank, in the production process of salt from sea water are respectively
Select the most efficient food chain among the food chains given below.
The composition of a glucose solution in terms of mass and volume is 90 g dm3. What is the concentration of that glucose solution? (Relative molecular mass of glucose is 180)
Which of the following is not a function of nucleic acids?
The final products of the reaction of haematite (Fe,O) with carbon monoxide gas in the temperature range of 1000°C - 1900°C are
Which of the following end products of digestion is not absorbed by the blood capillaries of the villi in the small intestine in human?
Which of the following is a function of human cerebellum?
A situation where a swan of mass 1.3 kg is at still water in pond is given in the figure. What is the upthrust acting on the swan by water? (Take the value of gravitational acceleration as 10 m s-2)
Consider the following chemical reaction. " ZnSO, +X- XSO, + Zn " Which of the following elements could be X?
A saturated solution of sugar was prepared at 80 °C temperature by dissolving a solid sample of sugar which has been made impure by a small amount of table salt. Which of the following measures can be taken to get pure sugar crystals?
Consider the instances A, B and C given below. A - A bat flying at night emitting ultrasound waves of 21 000 Hz. B - A dolphin preying in the ocean emitting ultrasound waves of 21 000 Hz. C - A rabbit walking in the jungle emitting ultrasound waves of 21 000 Hz. If the speeds of sound emitted at the above instances are V, V, and V respectively, which of the following relationships is correct?
An iron nail which was in contact with a metal M was kept in an agar medium which consists of small amounts of sodium chloride, potassium ferricyanide and phenolphthalein. After one hour, only pink colour was seen in the agar medium around the nail. M could be
Consider the following features. À - Nucleus is present peripherally in the cytoplasm. B - Having spherical cells with a large central vacuole. C - No inter cellular spaces. Of the above features, the features of parenchyma tissue are
On a table, a box is in equilibrium under three coplanar forces of 10, 15 and P Newtons. The resultant of the two forces 10N and 15N is 12N. Consider the statements X, Y and Z regarding the force P. ♡ - Magnitude of P is 12N. - Pacts in the direction of the resultant force of the two forces 10 N and 15 N. ? - The line of action of P goes through the intersecting point of the lines of actions of the two forces 10 N and 15 N. Of the above statements,
An organism has the following features. A - Consisting of eukaryotic cells B - Has the ability to decompose organic matter C - Presence of chitin in the cell wall To which kingdom does the above organism belong?
A child of mass 40 kg walked along a staircase from the first floor to the third floor of a building which is 9 m high from the first floor. The time taken by the child for this entire motion is 2 minutes. What is his rate of doing work? (Take the acceleration due to gravity as 10 m s-)
Test tube with the glass tube given in the figure is immersed in a vessel with Glass tube water and heated for a small period of time. Three statements regarding the observations of this experiment are given below. Test tube X - The water level in the glass tube rises up gradually from B and stops. Y - The water level in the glass tube drops down gradually from B and stops. -Coloured 2 - The water level in the glass tube drops down from B and then rises up and exceeds the level B. Of the above statements,
The information relevant to the motion of an object in a straight line is given below. Time/s Lo I I 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 Displacement/m 0 4 8 10 | 14 | 16 | 18 Which of the following statements is correct, according to the above information ?
A straight conductor AB which carries current I is kept in a magnetic field. The direction of magnetic field is perpendicular to the direction of flow of current through the conductor. Consider the changes done separately in situations X and Y given below. Situation X: Increasing current upto 21 without changing the magnetic field Situation Y: Decreasing the strength of magnetic field while keeping the current through AB as I. Which of the following statements is correct regarding the magnetic force that acts on AB in the two situations?
Consider the following activities. A - Minimization of food mile B - Energy management C- Use of traditional knowledge and technology The important activities for the sustainable development of Sri Lanka are
Which of the following is a vector quantity ?
According to the standards of binomial nomenclature, select the option which gives correctly the scientific name of Jungle Fowl.
The gas which is used to produce margarine from vegetable oils is
Which of the following seeds is adapted for dispersal by wind?
What is the colour of phenolphthalein in the basic medium?
What is the acid that is used for coagulation of rubber latex?
Which of the following is an amphoteric oxide ?
Which of the following can be used as a disinfectant ?
The catalyst which is used in the manufacture of sulphuric acid by the contact method is
Monocotyledonae plants
In which of the following instances does a chemical change occur ?
Who is the tertiary consumer in this food web?
Select the option which gives a type of non- granulocytes and a type of granulocytes respectively.
The number of lone pair electrons around O atom in a H,O molecule is
On a certain day, in Nuwara Eliya town, the daytime temperature was 16°C and night -time temperature was 4 °C. What is the temperature difference between day and night Nuwara Eliya town on that day, in Kelvin?
What is the number of double bonds in an isoprene molecule ?
Kamal works in a glass factory for a long period of time. In a medical test, it was revealed that his lung tissues are getting deteriorated gradually. Accordingly, which disease is Kamal suffering from?
In the asexual reproduction,
The focal length of a mirror is 30 cm. When an object is kept on the principal axis of the mirror, the image formed by the mirror is real and its size is equal to the size of the object. The distance from the mirror to the object is
What is the pressure exerted by water at a point located 2 m vertically below the water level in a lake? (Take the density of water as 1 000 kg m-3 and acceleration due to gravity as 10 m s-)
Amali's skin is dry and blisters have appeared on her knee and elbows. Further, Bito spots are in her eyes. From which of the following deficiencies of vitamins is Amali suffering?
Which of the following statements is false regarding photosynthesis?
A diagram of a longitudinal section of a bisexual flower is given below. Select the A pp option which gives two parts belonging to gynoecium and androecium respectively.
As shown in the figure (a), the glass Q stick inside the glass P. Which of the following strategies q is suitable to separate the two glasses easily?
Consider the following statements made by a student. A - Cinnamon oil can be extracted from Cinnamon leaves by using steam distillation. B - Petrol can be obtained from crude oil by using fractional distillation. C -Distilled water can be obtained from well water by using simple distillation. Of the above statements,
Which of the following reactions is a neutralization reaction?
The chemical formula of the carbonate of an element M is M,CO,. What is the chemical formula of the chloride of M?
Three properties of a particular element are given below. • Occurs in crystalline form as well as in amorphous form. • Insoluble in water, but very soluble in CS, solvent • Burns with a blue flame in air. Which of the following could be the element with above properties?
The limiting frictional force between two objects with rough surfaces in contact depends on
The gravitational acceleration on the moon is 1/6 th that of the earth. If the gravitational acceleration on the earth is 10 m s, what would be the weight of an astronaut of mass 60 kg, on the moon ?
The mole fraction of NaOH in a solution formed, When 2 moles of NaOH is dissolved in 10 moles of water is
Which of the following statements is false regarding the electrochemical cell green in the figure?
Consider the object A which is kept on a smooth horizontal surface as shown in the figure. Two horizontal forces of 15 N and X N are acting on A as shown in the figure. If the object is moving in the direction of the force X with a resultant force of 10 N, what is the value of X ?
Consider the following data relevant to the motion of a child in a straight line path from a certain point Time (s) oli 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 Displacement (m) 0 12 14 16 6 6 8 8 17 14 12 10 Which of the following statements is false regarding the motion of the child in the given time?
A figure of an arrangement to demonstrate the electromagnetic induction is given here. In which of the following instances the S galvanometer G does not indicate a deflection?
Anil, Jagath, Sujith and Namal living in Kurunegala town have had their breakfast on a certain day as shown in the following table. ..............TABLE.............. Rice and coconut had been obtained from Kurunegala area and potatoes had been obtained from Nuwara Eliya area. Rice flour had been obtained from Polonnaruwa area and fish from Negombo. Dhal and wheat flour had been obtained from India and America respectively Accordingly, who has taken the meal with the lowest food mile?
Which of the following plants is a non-flowering plant with seeds?
Select the answer which correctly gives the scientific name of pea plant, according to the binomial nomenclature.
Which of the following is a non-living structure of a plant cell?
Number of premolar teeth on both sides of the upper jaw of a healthy adult is
When a bottle of cinnamon oil is opened the smell of cinnamon oil spreads in the air. To which transport method does this belong?
Increase of which of the following factors does not increase transpiration?
In the human digestive system, which enzyme in the pancreatic juice digests protein?
The class teacher was unable to attend school for two days due to reddishness of the throat, pain in the throat and loss of voice. What could be the illness that she had?
A person who does not have any visual defect sees an object clearly in general, When its image is formed,
“Both sons born to particular parents are suffering from colour blindness.” Which of the following, can exactly be said regarding this statement?
A student observed the specimens A and B under the compound microscope and identified their tissues as parenchyma and sclerenchyma respectively. Which of the following plant parts would be the specimens A and B respectively?
“Organisms with more suited genetic variations will live longer.” This statement can be explained by the
Which metal is used to galvanise Iron?
In the experiments done in the school laboratory, oxygen gas is collected by the
An element X reacts with Cl, gas and forms the ionic compound XCIĄ. The electronic configuration of X could be
When a particular gas is bubbled into a colourless aqueous solution, the solution turns milky. The solution and the gas would be
Consider the following statements made regarding a certain element. • Occurs in allotropic forms in nature. • Has a high melting point. • It is used in the extraction of metals. What would this element be?
"An amount of heat 1.47 kJ has evolved when Ig of solid NaOH completely reacted with a solution of dil. HCI. What is the amount of heat evolved when 1 mol of solid NaOH completely reacted with a HCl solution? (Na = 23, O = 16, H =1)
"An amount of heat 1.47 kJ has evolved when Ig of solid NaOH completely reacted with a solution of dil. HCI. What is the correct energy diagram relevant to the reaction mentioned in the statement above?
Some plants in Hakgala botanical garden in Sri Lanka are grown in a glass house. For plants, this glass house provides
A student was able to observe a green coloured layer on the surface of a water body where waste water removed from a vegetable bed gets collected. He made the following statements according to the observation. A - Excessive amount of inorganic fertilizers have been used highly for the cultivation of vegetables. B - The green layer is concentrated with algae. C - BOD value of water in the water body has become low. Of the above, statements
The average temperature of the human body is 37 °C. This temperature in the Kelvin scale is
Which of the following elements can be doped with a piece of pure Silicon to convert it into an n-type semiconductor?
As shown in the figure, a ray of light is incident on a block of glass which is kept in air. When the magnitude of the angle of incidence is gradually increased up to 90° the magnitude of the angle of refraction will
In which of the following ways is the terminals of this integrated circuit numbered correctly?.
The volume of gold of a gold chain which was presented by a father to his daughter is said to bę 2 cm². If the density of that gold is 18 g cm3, what is the mass of the chain, the daughter received?
As shown in the figure, a small butterfly of mass 5 g (0.005 kg) flew from a point A on one flower to a point B on another flower. What is the change in potential energy of the butterfly when it flew from A to B ? (acceleration due to gravity= 10 ms 2)
Consider the following containers 0,2,3 and ©. The four containers are filled with pure water up to the heights of 12 cm, 12 cm, 15 cm and 14 cm respectively. IMG............ P, Q, R and S are points located at the bottom of the containers. Of the points, Which point experiences the maximum pressure due to water?
As shown in the figure an object of mass 1 kg moving at a uniform velocity of 4 m st. 4 ms' subsequently came to rest due to uniform deceleration. If the time that it decelerated - is 2s, select the answer which gives its deceleration and the momentum before the deceleration starts, respectively.
Consider the following statements. A - Pair of scissors is a second order lever. B - Mechanical advantage of a simple machine is given by the ratio effort load C- When a work is done with a non-moving single pulley, the velocity ratio of the pulley is 1. Of the above statements,
What is the potential difference between the terminals of the 3 12 resistor in the given min circuit?
A child heard the thunder 5 seconds after he saw a flash of lightning. If the speed of sound in air is 330 m s?, what is the distance between the place where the child was and the place where the lightning has occurred?
Two similar beakers A and B contain similar volumes of water. One of four similar nichrome coils is immersed in beaker A and the other three coils connected in series are immersed in beaker B as shown in ===== Water-IE-SL- figures. The same current I is passed through the coils for the same E-mammad period of time as shown in figures. If the increase in temperature of А B water in A and B are t, and t, respectively and there is no heat loss, which of the following is correct with regard to the temperatures?
The Department of Registration of Persons expects to issue electronic identity cards to citizens in Sri Lanka. This is a result of which of the following technologies?
Consider the following statements. P - Fulfilling the basic requirements of animals including human: Q - Maintaining the natural cycles like carbon cycle and water cycle R - Improving the beauty and cultural values of the country The services of biodiversity in Sri Lanka are
Which of the following suggestions is most suitable to solve more efficiently and effectively the environmental and social problems that have arisen due to the equipment such as televisions, computers and telephones removed from the rapidly developing world under global village concept?
What is the theme of world science day in the year 2015?
Which of the following is a non-flowering plant without seeds?
According to the classification of organisms, to which of the following groups of organisms do Penicillium notatum, and Gallus lafayetti belong respectively?
In which of the following are sclerids mostly present?
Select the answer which contains the substances that are present in blood plasma but not in tissue fluid.
Consider the diagram of the flower given here. Which of the following is an adaptation of this flower to prevent from self pollination?
Which of the following actions is a spinal reflex?
Which of the following organs does not contribute to maintain homeostasis of the human body?
Nuwan, Ravi and Shifan hadundergoneabloodtesttoidentifytheirbloodgroups. Accordingtothebloodtest, Nuwan can donate his blood to Ravi, but not to Shifan. Shifan is able to donate his blood to Nuwan and Ravi. The blood groups of Nuwan, Ravi and Shifan would be respectively
“The colour blind persons should refrain from driving vehicles." Which of the following is a reason for this statement?
Which of the following is a natural vegetative reproductive method?
Following are three statements on biopesticides. A - Biopesticides are ecofriendly B - Poisons produced by the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis is used as a biopesticide. C- Poisons of biopesticides do not accumulate along the food chains The true statement/s from the above is/are
Pattern of change in the number of organisms of a natural population A with time is shown in the graph. According to the graph, which of the following statements is false?
When an ion forms from a neutral atom in a chemical reaction,
The molecular formula of the sulphate of metal M is MSO, The molecular formula of the chloride of M is
Sulphuric acid which is a strong acid, ionizes in water as shown below. H.SO (aq)- > 2H+(aq) + SO + (aq) What is the total number of ions in one litre of 0.5 moldm’ H,SO solution ?
"When pressure decreases, the solubility of a gas in water decreases." Which of the following incidents confirms that this statement is true ?
A setup prepared in the laboratory to demonstrate rusting of iron is shown in the figure. In the setup, which region from the regions A, B and C of the test tube does the following reaction mainly occur? B 2H,O
When diluting a glucose solution by adding water, the number of solute particles in the solution
Select the group which only contains elements with allotropes.
Which of the following minerals is in its elemental state?
Which of the following gases does not influence the depletion of the ozone layer ?
Consider the following reaction. C,H,,0,,(s) Conch,SO (aq), 12C(s) + 11H,O
What is the unit that is used to measure the capacitance of a capacitor?
When an object is kept in front of a concave lens, the image produced by the lens is always
Consider the following table regarding situations where optical components are used in optical ....TABLE......... The situations which correctly indicate the optical instrument that uses the optical component given against it are
The three birds P,Q and R fly in the same horizontal direction with the velocities given in the figures. The mass of Q is twice that of P. The mass of R is thrice that of P. The bird/birds having the minimum kinetic energy is/are
Select the correct statement from the following statements.
A glass sheet having 4.5 mm of thickness is kept on a table. A picture which is kept under the glass sheet and in contact with surface of the table is viewed from above the glass, the apparent depth of a mark on the picture is (Refractive index of glass = 1:5)
An object is in equilibrium under three coplanar forces of F,F, and F. If F,=F,, which of the following diagrams correctly represents the three forces?
In the given circuit, what is the current flowing through a 9OHM resistor?
The rods A,B and C given in the figure are charged by rubbing them with three pieces of dry silk cloths a,b and c respectively. After that the pieces of cloths a,b and c are brought closer to rods A,B and C. it was observed that * the cloth a repels rod B * the cloth b repels rod C * the cloth c attracts rod A According to the observations, which of the following is correct
A box of mass 2 kg is kept on a table as shown in the figure. The box i moved along the table by applying an unbalanced force of X Newtons 900 cm? parallel to the surface of the table. The frictional force acting on the box by the surface of the table is Y Newtons. Consider the following statements. A - Magnitude of the external force applied in the direction of motion is equal to the sum of X and Y B - The magnitude of the acceleration of the box is half of X. C - When the surface of area 450 cm² is kept in contact with the table, and applied the same unbalanced force X in the same direction, the frictional force will be half of Y. of the above statements
Due to the high demand for organic food by people, organic farming has been started again in some areas of Sri Lanka. Which of the following is a problem faced by the farmers who are involved in organic farming ?
The technology of manufacturing cloths that do not retain dirt and that resist hot and cold conditions is a revolution of which of the following ?
Consider the following facts. P - Population growth Q - Rapid advancement of technology R - Occurrence of climatic changes To reach the expected targets, a developing country has to find new power sources due to the facts
Compound A is purified by recrystallization. Accordingly, which is the most probable graph that illustrates the variation of solubility (S) of compound A versus temperature (T)?
The active inorganic constituent of soil is,
Which response contains only fire extinguishers that are not suitable to be used for a fire associated with an electricity leakage?
Equal volumes of water samples X, Y and Z were heated, allowed to cool and filtered. Then equal volumes of soap solutions were added to them and stirred well. The observations obtained are given in the table below. ..TABLE.. According to the above observations the water samples with no hardness, temporary hardness and permanent hardness are respectively,
Which ray diagram does not give the correct path of a light ray incident on a concave mirror?
The symbol given in the figure represents,
A uniform beam XY of 60 cm in length is kept in equilibrium by suspending it from the mid point as shown in the diagram below. When a weight of 5 N is hung from the end X, at what distance from the mid point should a weight of 6 N be hung to bring xD the beam back to the equilibrium position?
The displacement-time graph for the motion of a man in a straight line path is shown in the figure. Which statement is true regarding his motion?
A tank is filled with water to a height of 2m from the bottom. What is the pressure exerted on the bottom of the tank by the water column? (Density of water is 1000 kg m-? and acceleration due to gravity is 10 ms?)
Masses and magnitudes of external forces acting on three objects A, B and C moving in a straight line are given in the able. The objects with equal acceleration are,
Three ways of connecting resistors in a circuit are given in the diagrams X, Y and Z below. The circuits with equal equivalent resistance between P and Q are
Which is the correct statement of the following?
A conducting wire carrying current is kept in a magnetic field perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic field. Thus, the force that acts on the wire is
It was reported recently that new laws are to be imposed in relation to vehicle horns. The main expected target of this attempt is,
Consider the following activities A, B and C. A - Use of glass bottles again and again for filling cool drinks. B - Use of used paper as raw material for paper production. C - Use of a lunch box to carry foods instead of using lunch sheets daily. Examples for the present solid waste management techniques namely recycle, reduce and reuse are respectively
The government promotes farmers to cultivate crops without using artificial agro chemicals. What techniques can be applied to control soil quality degradation and pest attacks here?
Massive development of the human civilization that occurred from time to time was due to the technological advancement that occurred in each of those eras. Which technological advancement will be able to lead the present day world to such a massive development?
The most essential organelle that should be present in a typical cell to pass hereditary characteristics to the next generation is,
A special feature that can be seen in a wind-pollinated flower is the presence of,
Which of the following components are present in the urine of a healthy person?
Consider the following industries. A - Baking industry B - Production of antibiotics C- Yoghurt production Of these, fungi are used for
A child who seemed stunted in the young age, started growing to the normal height when a hormone was injected continuously. This hormone could be,
In which of the following instances does a meiotic division occur?
During inspiration,
Which of the following statements is correct about enzymes?
Of a plant type in which tallness is the dominant character and shortness is the recessive character, two heterozygous plants were crossed. What is the phenotype ratio of the daughter plants?
Given below are three statements with regard, to photosynthesis and respiration. A - Respiration is the reverse reaction of the photosynthetic reaction. B - Photosynthesis produces energy and respiration also produces energy. C - Organisms with chloroplasts photosynthesise and all organisms respire. Which of the above statements are correct?
Two following types of organisms live together in an environment. A - A group of organisms whose skin has turned dark due to a gene mutation B - A group of organisms whose skin had turned dark to severe sunlight Which of the following statements is correct as regards the evolution of the above groups by natural selection?
An element belonging to the third period of the periodic table, burns in air to give an acidic oxide. What is this element?
What is the feature common to all the three compounds NaHCO3, Ca (OH)2 and NH3?
Which of the following gas can convert iron oxide to iron?
There are two identical iron vessels, one fully coated with the metal zinc and the other with the metal tin. Identical parts of both vessels were scratched similarly till the iron surface was exposed. What observation would b expected after keeping the two vessels in an open place for about a week?
The reaction between which of the following pairs of reactants will give bleaching powder as a product.
Which diagram best displays how the gas molecules are distributed in a balloon filled with helium gas?
Some instances in which a certain gas is used are indicated below. • Used to burn fuels in rockets. • Used to purify iron in steel industry. • Used to produce the oxyacetylene flame. Which of the following gas conforms to the above information?
Two identical vessels are completely filled with water and one is maintained at 30°C while the other is maintained at 50 °C. Two identical balloons with equal volumes of a gas were immersed in the vessels as shown in the diagram. Select the correct statement with regard to the volumes of water displaced from the beakers after a constant period of time.
In some thermometers alcohol is used instead of mercury. The main advantage of this is,
Which of the following is the true statement about the transistor shown in the diagram and its action?
As illustrated by the diagram, an insulated copper wire is wound around plastic tube and a current I is passed through it. The magnetic effect created by the coil cannot be increased by,
Shown in the diagram is how a crowbar is used to roll a log. Which is the true statement about the use of the crowbar in this event?
Consider the following statements about the electromagnetic waves. A - A medium is not required for the propagation of electromagnetic waves. B - Can exist as both transverse and longitudinal waves. C - Propagated by electrical and magnetic fields which oscillate perpendicular to each other. Of these, the true statements are,
The figure illustrates the way two sound waves X and Y are displayed by a cathode ray oscilloscope. Which of the following statements is true about X and Y?
A stone is thrown vertically up with a velocity of 20 ms-!. The maximum height reached by the stone and the total time taken by it to fall on the ground are
Consider the following statements about A - Forces always act individually. B - If three forces happen to come to equilibrium, they should operate on the same plane. C- There can be a uniform velocity for an object when the resultant force is zero.Which of the above are true?
Which of the following settings will give a parallel emergent emergent beam of light?
As illustrated in the diagram, a column of air is trapped by mercury inside a glass tube sealed at one end. If the atmospheric pressure is Po, which of the following expressions gives the pressure P of the gas inside the tube. (Density of mercury is p)
Variation in the pattern of climatic changes is a major challenge confronting the world today. What is the environmental hazard that largely contributes to this?
Construction of expressways through forest areas cuts off the natural corridors along which the wild animals move. This affects the biodiversity the best remedy for this situation is,
In an event of lightning, the risk is minimum when,
The sea water wetlands such as Bundala and Anavilundawa of Sri Lanka have been accepted as a world heritage. Existence of endemic living species and the arrival of migratory birds are their special features. Select from the following the statement that most correctly describes the damage caused to such a wetland by the mixing of freshwater drained by a water supply project.
Which of the following gives the botanical name of coconut according to binomial nomenclature correctly?
Which of the following is the correct statement about the three main types of muscles in the human body, the skeletal muscles, smooth muscles and cardiac muscles? .
What is the correct path along which an impulse travels in a reflex arc?
A person suffering from colour blindness
A man sighting a barking and lunging dog, starts to run fast. Which of the following hormone secreted in the human body is related to this incident?
Cell division involves division of the nucleus and cytoplasm and production of daughter cells. In mitosis, daughter cell acquires.
The 'population' is correctly defined as
Which of the following correctly indicates the phenomena illustrated by the diagrams A, B and C?
Which of the following principles is justified by the fact that some organisms match their body colours with that of the environment, resemble plant leaves or twigs and have mottled (with stripes and patches) skins?
A function controlled by the medulla oblongata is
In the isotope is cl of chlorine, the number of protons, neutrons and electrons respectively are
An atom of a certain element contains four energy levels filled with electrons. Its outermost energy level contains two electrons. The period and group to which that element belongs rspectively are
A balloon filled with hydrogen gas moves vertically up from the ground. Which graph correctly shows the variation of the volume of the balloon (V) against the vertical height (h) to the balloon from the ground? (Assume that the temperature remains constant.)
To two equal volumes of water at the same temperature, common salt in the form of ordinary crystals and powder was added separately and dissolved. When the two solutions are saturated, which of the following is correct about the masses of salt dissolved?
At an archaeological site, an old iron sword with a silver hilt was found. Though the silver hilt was well protected with fine carvings, the rest of the sword had heavily corroded. Which of the following best explains, this observation?
The label of a bottle of concentrated hydrochloric acid (HCl) in the laboratory indicates that it is 36.5% (w/w). This means that
Which of the following chemical found in home can be used to speed up the clotting of rubber latex?
What is the formula of the compound formed by the combination of a trivalent metal M with a divalent Non-metal X?
During the production of salt in salterns, precipitation of salts occurs in the order calcium carbonate, calcium sulphate and sodium chloride. Which of the following correctly gives the relationship among the solubilities of those salts?
Of carbon, graphite and diamond are
Which of the following has the maximum effect on the depletion of the ozone layer?
Which of the following is true about the transistor shown in the figure?
Equal quantities of heat are provided to two objects of equal masses made of substances of different specific heat capacities. Which of the following statements is correct with regard to the final temperature of those objects?
The part of the electrical circuit shown in the diagram with two switches connected in series demonstrates the action of a/an.
In any instance an object is placed in front of the optical items, A, B, C and D a virtual image is produced by
A stone thrown vertically upwards falls freely on the ground. Which of the following is the correct velocity – time graph for the complete motion of the stone?
The circuits below show four ways of connecting two resistors of resistance 1012 and 2012 and a cell with a constant electromotive force of 2 V. Which circuit shows the highest ammeter reading?
Consider the following statements regarding the electrostatic charges. A - The petrol bowsers are earthed through a metal chain to prevent accumulation of electrostatic charges on them. B - In the production of hydroelectricity, the electrostatic charges in water are converted to current electricity by the dynamo. C- During lightening, electrostatic charges in a cloud make an electric discharge with another cloud or with the earth. Which of the above statements are true?
A coil and a sensitive -centre-zero galvanometer are connected as shown in the diagram. The galvanometer does- not show a deflection when.
Which of the following ray diagrams displays a phenomenon that cannot occur when a monochromatic (single colour) ray of light passes through a prism?
Which of the following can be explained by the equilibrium among three forces?
It was reported recently that a small asteroid passed across the moon's orbit around Earth. Which of the following is least likely to happen in such an occasion?
Deaths and destruction of property due to natural disasters are on the increase at present. The best measure that can be adopted to minimise losses during such a disaster is
Recently it was published that there is a gaseous fuel ore in the Sri Lankan sea bed. What gas would most probably be a major component of that ore?
Which of the following has the highest risk of being struck with lightening during a thunderstorm?
The organisms that decompose dead organic matter in the environment are referred to as
A feature shown by dicotyledonous plants is the
Which statement given below is correct in relation to both algae and fungi?
A lichen is formed by the union of a species of algae and a species of fungi. The relationship between these two species in the lichen is referred to as
Excretory products are the unwanted by products formed within the body during bio chemical processes. Accordingly which of the following is not an excretory product liberated by the human body.
